# 1. Requirements

Before installing pldotnet, you will need to have the following software
installed on your system:

- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) 10 or greater
- [.NET](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/) 6.0 or greater
*pldotnet* also requires `libglib2.0` and `make`, which you can
install using the command below.

```bash
sudo apt install -y libglib2.0 make
```

You can also use the ready-to-go Docker images of pldotnet. In this case, you will need:
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) (we recommend version 25.0)
- [postgresql-client](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) if you want to connect to the database

# 2. Using Docker

Currently, pldotnet is available with public Docker containers and can be executed using the following instructions:

First, make sure that you are not running a local Postgres database or using the 5432 port in your machine.

# 2.1 Ubuntu22-based image

If you want to use an Ubuntu22 Docker image with PostgreSQL and pldotnet installed, you can run:

```bash
docker run --rm -it ghcr.io/brunomeyer/ubuntu22-pldotnet
```

By default, the previous command will redirect you to a psql connection. If you want to enter the container using bash, run:

```bash
docker run --rm -it --entrypoint bash ghcr.io/brunomeyer/ubuntu22-pldotnet
```


# 2.2 Postgres-based image

This image is built on top of the official PostgreSQL image.
You will probably want to use it on your production system in your production environment (it is recommended to use the [`docker-compose`](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) tool.
You can use it to replace any PostgreSQL image in a container composition.

To download and start the service, run:

```bash
docker run --rm  --name postgres-pldotnet -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password123 -p 5432:5432 postgres-pldotnet:15-bullseye
```

Then, you can connect to your database using psql:
```bash
PGPASSWORD=password123 psql -h localhost -U postgres
```

As this image is derived from the official Postgres image, you can refer to [their official documentation](https://hub.docker.com/_/postgres) for more information.

# 2.3 Testing pldotnet

To test pldotnet, you can easily verify its functionality by copying and pasting the following code into your psql connection:

```sql
DO $$ Elog.Info("Hello PL.NET!"); $$ LANGUAGE plcsharp;
```

You should see something like this:

```sql
 * Starting PostgreSQL 14 database server                                                                                                                                                            [ OK ] 
psql (14.10 (Ubuntu 14.10-0ubuntu0.22.04.1))
Type "help" for help.

postgres=# DO $$ Elog.Info("Hello PL.NET!"); $$ LANGUAGE plcsharp;
INFO:  Hello PL.NET!
DO
```

# 3. Installing .NET

.NET is a free, open-source, cross-platform framework developed by
Microsoft that enables developers to build a variety of applications,
including web, mobile, desktop, gaming, and IoT (Internet of Things)
applications. .NET is built on top of the Common Language Runtime (CLR),
which provides a runtime environment for executing code written in a
variety of languages, including C#, Virtual Basic, and F#.

One of the key features of .NET is its ability to support multiple
programming languages, which allows developers to choose the language
that best fits their needs and expertise. .NET also includes a rich
set of libraries and frameworks for building applications, including
the .NET Framework, .NET Core, and ASP.NET.

For installing .NET please follow the instructions on the [official
Microsoft page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/install/)
according to your operational system.

Typically for Ubuntu 22.04, the instructions are:

```bash
# Download Microsoft's Debian package:
wget https://packages.microsoft.com/config/ubuntu/22.04/packages-microsoft-prod.deb -O packages-microsoft-prod.deb

# Install the package:
sudo dpkg -i packages-microsoft-prod.deb

# Remove the downloaded file:
rm packages-microsoft-prod.deb

# Update the package lists:
sudo apt-get update

# Soon pldotnet will support .NET 7.
# Install .NET 6:
sudo apt-get install -y dotnet-sdk-6.0 dotnet-runtime-6.0 dotnet-hostfxr-6.0
```

# 4. Installing PostgreSQL

PostgreSQL, also known as Postgres, is a free and open-source
relational database management system emphasizing extensibility and
SQL compliance. It is designed to handle a range of workloads, from
single machines to data warehouses or Web services with many
concurrent users. It is the default database for macOS Server, and
is also available for Linux, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and Windows.

PostgreSQL is known for its strong support for transactions and
reliability, as well as its ability to handle a wide variety of
data types, including JSON and arrays. It also has a large and
active developer community, with many additional libraries and tools
available to enhance its capabilities.

You can install PostgreSQL following the instruction on the [official
page](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) according to your
operational system and desired version. Here are the steps to install
on Ubuntu:

```bash
# Create the file repository configuration:
sudo sh -c 'echo "deb http://apt.postgresql.org/pub/repos/apt $(lsb_release -cs)-pgdg main" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pgdg.list'

# Import the repository signing key:
wget --quiet -O - https://www.postgresql.org/media/keys/ACCC4CF8.asc | sudo apt-key add -

# Update the package lists:
sudo apt-get update

# Install the latest version of PostgreSQL.
# If you want a specific version, use 'postgresql-12' or similar instead of 'postgresql':
sudo apt-get -y install postgresql
```

# 5. Installing *pldotnet*

As already mentioned, *pldotnet* is a free software (Apache v2)
project that extends PostgreSQL to support stored procedures and
triggers for the .NET platform, including both C\# and F\#.

We at [Brick Abode](https://www.brickabode.com/) provide Debian
packages for different versions of PostgreSQL on `amd64` architectures.

- postgres-10-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64
- postgres-11-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64
- postgres-12-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64
- postgres-13-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64
- postgres-14-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64
- postgres-15-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64

You can choose the most suitable version of *pldotnet* for your
needs and install it using

```bash
sudo dpkg -i postgres-*-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64.deb
```

Once *pldotnet* is installed, you can start using it to write code
that interacts with your database using popular programming languages
like C#. This can be a fun and rewarding experience for developers.

## 5.1 Building Debian packages

### 5.1.1 Using Docker

To create Debian packages for *pldotnet* using Docker, you will
need to have `docker` and `docker-compose` installed on your machine.
You can find instructions for installation in the [oficial Docker
documentation](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/).

Before you can build the packages, you'll need to specify the version
of PostgreSQL you're using in the `pldotnet/debian/pgversions` file.
By default, the package is generated for PostgreSQL 15, so if you're
using a different version, you'll need to replace `15` in the file
with the version you're using.

Once you've installed `docker` and `docker-compose` and set the
PostgreSQL version in the `pldotnet/debian/pgversions` file, you
can build the *pldotnet* packages by following these steps:

```bash
# Clone the pldotnet repository:
git clone https://github.com/Brick-Abode/pldotnet.git

# Change into the repository directory:
cd pldotnet

# Initialize submodules
git submodule update --init --recursive

# Create a docker container to build the packages
docker-compose up pldotnet-build
```

The packages will be stored in the `pldotnet/debian/packages`
directory.

If you want to try out *pldotnet* before installing it on your
machine, you can use a Docker container by running the following
commands:

```bash
# Create a docker container and open the bash terminal
docker-compose run --rm pldotnet-build bash

# Install pldotnet inside the container
dpkg -i debian/packages/postgres-15-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64.deb
```

#### 5.1.1.1 Debian packages on ARM processors

To create *pldotnet* packages for installation on ARM processors,
you will need to specify the version of PostgreSQL you are using
in the `pldotnet/debian/pgversions-arm` file. Then, navigate to the
*pldotnet* directory and run the following command:

```bash
# Create a docker container to build the ARM packages
docker-compose up pldotnet-build-arm
```

After building the packages, they will be stored in the
`pldotnet/debian/packages` directory. If you want to install them in a
clean container, you can use the following instructions:

```bash
# Create a docker container and open the bash terminal
docker-compose run --rm pldotnet-build-arm bash

# Install pldotnet inside the container
dpkg -i debian/packages/postgresql-15-pldotnet_0.1-1_amd64.deb
```

### 5.1.2 Using your own machine

You can use your own machine to create Debian packages for pldotnet.
In addition to having PostgreSQL and .NET installed, you'll need
to have the following packages installed:

- build-essential
- devscripts
- debhelper

You can install these packages by running the following command:

```bash
sudo apt install -y build-essential devscripts debhelper
```

Once you have all the required packages installed, you can create
the pldotnet packages with the following commands:

```bash
# Update the control file
pg_buildext updatecontrol

# Build the Debian packages
debuild -b -uc -us --lintian-opts --profile debian

# Copy the packages to the correct directory
cp ../postgresql-*-pldotnet_*.deb debian/packages/

# Remove unnecessary files created during the build process
rm -rf ../postgresql-*-pldotnet_*.deb ../pldotnet_*.build ../pldotnet_*.buildinfo ../pldotnet_*.changes ../postgresql-*-pldotnet*.ddeb
```
