# 1. Functions

In PostgreSQL, a function is a block of SQL code that is stored in
the database and can be called by name from other parts of the code.

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION function_name([arg_name arg_type]*) RETURNS <return_type> AS $$
<your_code>
$$ LANGUAGE <language> [STRICT];
```

Functions can accept input parameters and return output parameters
or result sets. They can be used to encapsulate a specific task or
set of tasks that may need to be performed multiple times within a
larger block of code. Functions can be called from other functions,
triggers, or statements within the database, and they can be used
to improve the modularity and maintainability of the code.  First,
you use the syntax to create a normal function in `SQL`:

Here is important to clarify some tags in the code above:

- `<language>`: The chosen language, that can be either `plcsharp` for
`C#` or `plfsharp` for `F#`;
- `<your_code>`: Here you insert the code in the language you choose;
- `<return_type>`: Datatype of the function's response;
- `[STRICT]`: This keyword is optional. When inserted, it forbids the
function to accept `NULL` values;
- `[arg_name arg_type]*`: This is a list of arguments for the function.

Here is an example of a C# Function that takes two integer values
and returns if they are equal to a boolean value:

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION are_integers_equal(a integer, b integer) RETURNS boolean AS $$
return a == b;
$$ LANGUAGE plcsharp;
```

Just for the record, the F# Version of the function would be the
following:

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION are_integers_equal(a integer, b integer) RETURNS boolean AS $$
a.Equals(b)
$$ LANGUAGE plfsharp;
```

now, to run the function you can just call it inside a statement.
For example, the following `SELECT`:

```SQL
SELECT are_integers_equal(0,1), are_integers_equal(1,1), are_integers_equal(NULL,1), are_integers_equal(NULL,NULL);
```

The expected output for both of them would be the following:

```bash
 are_integers_equal | are_integers_equal | are_integers_equal | are_integers_equal
------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------
 f                | t                | f                | t
(1 row)
```

# 2. Procedures

In PostgreSQL, a procedure is a named block of SQL statements that
can be invoked repeatedly. Procedures can accept input parameters
and return output parameters, and they can be used to encapsulate
complex business logic or to perform common tasks.

For them, you can do it the same way as Functions, but they don't
return any value. In the Future, they can change some data with
SPIs, but for now, you can create as follows:

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE funcName([arg_name arg_type]*) AS $$
<your_code>
$$ LANGUAGE <language>;
```

Here is important to clarify some tags in the code above:

- `<language>`: The chosen language, that can be either `plcsharp` for
`C#` or `plfsharp` for `F#`;
- `<your_code>`: Here you insert the code in the language you choose;
- `[arg_name arg_type]*`: This is a list of arguments for the function.

This is an example:

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE print_sum_procedure(a integer, b integer) AS $$
int c = (int)a + (int)b;
Elog.Info($"c = {c}");
$$ LANGUAGE plcsharp;
```

With the following `CALL` statements

```SQL
CALL print_sum_procedure(10, 25);
CALL print_sum_procedure(1450, 275);
```

You get the following output:

```bash
INFO:  c = 35
CALL
INFO:  c = 1725
CALL
```

You can see that it didn't return any data, just logged the value on
the shell.

# 3. `DO` Blocks

In PostgreSQL, a `DO` block is a block of code that is executed as
a single unit within a larger block of code. `DO` blocks are similar
to procedures in other programming languages, but they are not
stored in the database and cannot be called by name. `DO` blocks
are typically used for defining variables or for executing a series
of statements that do not need to be called repeatedly.

The `DO` Blocks is similar to a script, and have the following
characteristics:

- They don't return any value;
- Don't take arguments;
- Are not stored in the database after execution.

Here is a template of a `DO` Block:

```SQL
do $$
<your_code>
$$ language <language>;
```

A simple example in F# would be this one:

```SQL
do $$
    let c = 10 + 25
    Elog.Info("c = " + c.ToString())
$$ language plfsharp;
```

Upon execution, this block of code would print the following output
on the shell:

```bash
INFO:  c = 35
DO
```
