# 1. Providing your own dynamic-link library

To create a dynamic-link library (DLL) from a .NET project, you can
follow these steps:

1. Open a command prompt or terminal window and navigate to the
   directory where you want to create your project.
2. Run `dotnet new console --language C#` to create a new .NET
   console project in C#, or `dotnet new console --language F#` to
   create a project in F#.
3. Open the project in your preferred code editor or IDE.
4. By default, `dotnet new console` creates a `Program` file with
   the extension of the chosen programming language. In this file, you
   can create a namespace, class, and methods for use with *pldotnet*,
   as shown in the following example:


   ```csharp
   namespace TestDLLFunctions
   {
       public class TestClass
       {
           public static BitArray? modifybit(BitArray? a)
           {
               if (a == null)
               {
                   return null;
               }

               a[0] = !a[0];
               a[^1] = !a[^1];
               return a;
           }
       }
   }
   ```

5. Build the project using the `dotnet build . -c Release` command.
6. If the build is successful, you will find the DLL file in the
   `bin` folder of your project.

You can then use the DLL file in other .NET projects by adding a
reference to it in your project and calling the function from your
code.

To run the DLL inside SQL, connect to the database using a tool
such as `psql` or a graphical client.

Create a function in the database that maps to the DLL function you
want to use.

The path to the DLL file and the fully-qualified name of the function
(including the namespace and class name) are specified in the AS
clause.

Here is how it is composed:

```bash
path/to/file/filename.dll:NamespaceName.ClassName!FunctionName
```

In the example you bellow, the function is named `modifyBitDLL` and
takes a single argument of type BIT(10). The function is defined
using the `CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION` statement:

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION modifyBitDLL(a BIT(10)) RETURNS BIT(10) AS '/app/pldotnet/tests/csharp/DotNetTestProject/bin/Release/net6.0/CSharpTest.dll:TestDLLFunctions.TestClass!modifybit' LANGUAGE plcsharp;
```

After creating the function, you can call it like any other function
in the database using the SELECT statement.

In the example, the function is called with the argument '10101'::BIT(10)
in the code below:

```SQL
SELECT modifyBitDLL('10101'::BIT(10));
```

The output of the function will depend on the specific logic
implemented in the DLL function.

The output in this case is the modified BIT(10) value returned by
the DLL function:

```bash
 modifybitdll
--------------
 0010100001
(1 row)
```
