# 1. Settings

You can customize the *pldotnet* source code by modifying the
`dotnet_src/Engine.cs` file. There, you can find the following options
to change:

- `AlwaysNullable`: By default, this is set to `false`, meaning that
*pldotnet* will only map data types as nullable when the user function
is created without the `STRICT` option. However, you can set it to `true`
to always map data types as nullable.
- `PrintSourceCode`: The default is `false`, but you can change it to
`true` to print the generated code to the console before compiling the
dynamic codes.
- `SaveSourceCode`: By default, this is set to `false`, but you can
change it to `true` to save the generated code in a directory.
- `PathToSaveSourceCode`: The default location to save the generated code
is `/tmp/PlDotNET/GeneratedCodes`, this only be used when `SaveSourceCode
= true`, the directory needs to have `0700` mode.
- `PathToTemporaryFiles`: The default location of *pldotnet* temporary
files is `/tmp/PlDotNET/`.  This is used with `plfsharp` to save some
files while compiling the dynamic F# code. This directory must also have
`0700` mode.

# 2. PostgreSQL reports

In order to report messages in PostgreSQL, you can utilize the `Elog`
class and its various methods. The following example demonstrates how
to use these methods within a DO block:

````sql
do $$
Elog.Debug("Here is a debug message...");
Elog.Log("Here is a log message...");
Elog.Info("Here is an info message...");
Elog.Notice("Here is a notice message...");
Elog.Warning("Here is a warning message...");
$$ language plcsharp;
````

The output of this inline function is similar to what you would see when
using the appropriate Python functions to report messages with pl/python:

```bash
INFO:  Here is an info message...
NOTICE:  Here is a notice message...
WARNING:  Here is a warning message...
DO
```

To raise an error and stop code execution,
you can use the `Elog.Error` method or throw an
[Exception](https://learn.microsoft.com/pt-br/dotnet/api/system.exception.-ctor?view=net-7.0).
The following example illustrates this concept:

```sql
do $$
try {
    Elog.Error("Here is the first error message...");
}
catch (Exception e) {
    Elog.Info($"***{e.Message}***");
    throw new Exception("Here is the second error message...");
    Elog.Info("This message must not be executed.");
}
$$ language plcsharp;
```

Here is the output of the above `DO` block:

```bash
INFO:  ***Here is the first error message...***
WARNING:  Exception: Here is the second error message...
ERROR:  PL.NET function "plcsharp_inline_block".
```

# 3. Error handling

## 3.1 Compilation errors

When a user creates a function using `plcsharp` or `plfsharp`
procedural languages, the pldotnet extension generates the
corresponding dynamic codes and attempts to compile them. In case
of any errors or issues with the user's code, the compilation
process, which uses [Roslyn](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn) or
[FSharp.Compiler.Service](https://fsharp.github.io/fsharp-compiler-docs/fcs/),
will fail and the pldotnet will report the errors to the user.

As an example, consider the following function that contains three
different errors that will result in a failure during the compilation
process:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION compilation_errors() RETURNS INTEGER AS $$
    int a = b;
    string c = a;
    return c;
$$ language plcsharp;
```

When this function is attempted to be compiled, pldotnet will report
the compilation error like this:

```cs
namespace PlDotNET.UserSpace
{
    public static class UserFunction
    {
        public static int? compilation_errors()
        {
#line 1
            int a = b;
            string c = a;
            return c;
        }
    }
}
**********
Here are the compilation results:
(1,21): error CS0103: The name 'b' does not exist in the current context
(2,24): error CS0029: Cannot implicitly convert type 'int' to 'string'
(3,20): error CS0029: Cannot implicitly convert type 'string' to 'int?'

WARNING:  SystemException: PL.NET could not compile the generated C# code.
ERROR:  PL.NET function "compilation_errors".
```

It's important to note that due to the error, the function will
not be created in the database, meaning it will not be available for
execution. To use the function, the user will need to fix the errors in
the code and try to create the function again. This is a safety mechanism
that prevents the storage and execution of faulty code in the database.

## 3.2 Runtime errors

Errors that occur only during the execution of a program, known as
runtime errors, can include issues such as accessing an index outside
of an array's bounds or dividing by zero. These types of errors cannot
be detected during the compilation process and are only reported when
the program is executed and the specific function is called.

For example, consider the following procedure, where we define an array
`a` with a length of 5. However, the code attempts to assign a value to
an index that exceeds the size of the array:

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE runtime_error() AS $$
    int[] a = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 };
    a[5] = 5;
$$ language plcsharp;
```

Even though this procedure can be created in the database, and will
return the message `CREATE PROCEDURE`, if it is called using the command
`CALL runtime_error()`, an error message will be displayed:

```bash
WARNING:  IndexOutOfRangeException: Index was outside the bounds of
the array.
ERROR:  PL.NET function "runtime_error".
```

An example of another runtime error is demonstrated in the following
procedure, where an attempt is made to convert a nullable integer argument
to a non-nullable integer variable:

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE runtime_error(a INTEGER) AS $$
    int b = (int)a;
$$ language plcsharp;
```

While this procedure may work when the argument passed in is not null,
if it is called with the command `CALL runtime_error(NULL::INTEGER)`,
it will fail and generate the following error message:

```bash
WARNING:  InvalidOperationException: Nullable object must have a value.
ERROR:  PL.NET function "runtime_error".
```

This error occurs because the argument passed in is null, and C# cannot
convert a null value to a non-nullable type. To avoid this error, the
argument should be checked for null before the conversion, or the variable
`b` should be defined as nullable integer (`int?`).
