# 1. *pldotnet* tests

To run the tests in the `tests` folder, you can use the `make`
command followed by the name of the test you want to run. For
example, to run the F# tests, you can use the `make fsharp-tests`
command. To run the C# tests, you can use the `make csharp-tests`
command. If you want to run all the tests at once, you can use the
`make pldotnet-tests` command.

Before running the tests, make sure that you have the required
dependencies installed and that your environment is set up correctly
(see the [Installation
guide](https://github.com/Brick-AbodeBrick-Abode/pldotnet/wiki/02.-Installation-guide)
page). If you are having trouble running the tests, you may want
to check the documentation or seek help from the relevant support
channels.

Our system has tests for all the implemented types, and you can use
these tests to help you become productive quickly.

The output is saved inside the `automated_test_results` folder with
the `<testfile>.out` name. A summary of all of them is placed with
the `automated_test_results.out` name.

# 2. Benchmark tests

We have included tests to measure the speed of our system, and we
have set up a docker container to compare the performance of PL/.NET
with other procedural languages such as *pljava*, *plpython*, *plv8*.
To start and access this container, you can follow these steps:

```bash
# Clone the pldotnet repository:
git clone https://github.com/Brick-Abode/pldotnet.git

# Change into the repository directory:
cd pldotnet

# Create a docker container to build the packages
docker-compose run --rm pldotnet-ubuntu22 bash
```

While inside the container, you can execute the benchmark tests by
running the `make benchmark-tests` command. The results of these
tests will be saved in a CSV file located in the `automated_test_results`
folder, and the file will be named using the following format:
`YEAR-MONTH-DAY_HOUR-MINUTES-SECONDS.csv`.

# 3. Stress tests

We have also included stress tests to ensure the stability and
reliability of our system under heavy load. However, before running
them, also make sure that you have the required dependencies installed
and that your environment is set up correctly.

You can run these tests using the `make stress-test` command. The
tests results will be stored in a CSV file named `stress_test.out`
in the `automated_test_results` folder.
